Thank you and welcome to session 116,
Mac OS file systems.
The Mac OS has supported multiple
file systems for a long time now,
and now with the UNIX foundation in OS X,
we support a whole
plethora of file systems.
And to tell you all about those
different file systems and
how you should be using them,
I'd like to introduce the manager
of the Core OS file systems group,
Clark Warner.
I'm really glad to see all of you here.
I know it's early and
I appreciate your coming.
I hope we're going to have some
very useful information for you
about the Mac OS X file system.
We'll start with this.
A welcome and a little idea
of some of the stuff that
we're going to cover today.
We're not going to talk
as much about futures,
obviously.
You've probably heard that as a theme
throughout the developers conference.
The present is so much
more exciting this year.
And we're not going to talk as much about
file system internals because we know
that a lot of you are now in the process
of bringing your apps over to Mac OS X.
So we're going to concentrate
on some of the things that your
apps need to be prepared for when
they're using the file system.
As Jason mentioned,
we have a number of different file
systems in Mac OS X and they do
present some occasional wrinkles.
We also are going to give you
some tips into how to improve
the performance of your app,
especially with regard when
it's--to its use of the file system.
But we will talk a little bit about
some of the key issues in building file
systems yourself to add to Mac OS X.
If you went to the Darwin overview
session or probably any
of the Core OS sessions,
you've seen this chart already.
This is the key "You are here" graphic.
If we were on an airplane now, you know,
we'd be saying, "This is to San Jose.
If you're going to Hawaii,
get off now." We are part of the
BSD kernel inside of the file system.
Here's a blowup of what the file
system looks like internally.
We support, basically,
at the Core OS level, the BSD,
Berkeley Standard Software Distribution
System calls,
with some extensions.
Inside of the file system,
there is a big switch we call
the virtual file system layer,
which separates the part of the file
system which is dependent on the
underlying volume format or network.
The network protocol from the part of
the file system which is independent.
So the stuff above the
VFS layer is independent.
The stuff below is dependent.
And that's why you see our list
of file systems below underneath
the virtual file system switch,
UFS, HFS, NFS.
And we'll talk to you about
all of the various file systems
that are supported in Mac OS X.
Here's the outline of today's talk.
There'll be something of a status update,
basically an indication of
the file systems that we ship.
We're going to do a demo of
a couple of the new ones.
We're going to talk only
briefly about some of the
different file system interfaces.
We've covered that in a number
of years and there are a lot of
sessions describing the application
frameworks for use in Mac OS X.
But we will spend a fair amount of
time talking about the differences
between the various file systems
that Mac OS X supports and
again how that might affect
your application development.
We'll talk about security because that's
been a large issue for a lot of folks.
Mac OS X is a multi-user system with
per level file permissions and in that
way it differs greatly from Mac OS 9
and you need to be ready for permissions
errors potentially in your applications.
We're going to talk about performance
considerations as I mentioned
and we'll talk a little bit
about building new file systems.
First status slide,
I think this is my third or fourth
Worldwide Developers Conference session
talking about the interesting things
we were going to do in Mac OS X.
And the recent things we
had done in interim build A,
B and so forth.
This is the first time I get to say this.
[Transcript missing]
This is why I love this crowd.
All right, so Mac OS X.
We have three primary file systems.
And when we say primary,
what we mean is they're fully
read and write file systems,
and we can boot and root off of them.
So we can boot and root off of the
Mac OS Extended Format File System,
best known to those who know and love it
as HFS+. We can boot and root off of UFS,
the Unix file system that we support
based on the Berkeley FAST file system.
And we can boot and root off of NFS.
In fact, we do that internally all
the time for installs.
We also have some read and
write file systems that we
don't boot and root off of,
but are otherwise first-class citizens.
And that includes the
Mac OS Standard Format,
otherwise known as HFS,
for legacy data that you
may have on your Mac.
The Apple File Protocol, an AFP client,
was delivered by the
server team into Mac OS X.
We have support for MS-DOS file system,
and specifically we mean
FAT16 and FAT32 here,
which we did largely for
digital cameras and so forth,
but also zip drives and removal
media coming from your DOS machine.
And WebDAV,
and we'll talk about WebDAV in more
detail a little bit later on in the talk.
There are also some read-only file
systems supported in Mac OS X,
including ISO 9660,
which is used on lots of CD formats,
especially to interchange
between Mac and Windows.
We support the Universal Disk Format.
Actually,
I don't think it's called that anymore.
I think they just use the initials UDF,
sort of like KFC in
Kentucky Fried Chicken.
And CDDAFS, a file system written by the
CPU Software Group to support CD audio,
CD audio drives, CD audio disks, rather,
music.
ISO 9660, I should mention,
we can also boot and root from.
I didn't mention it in the primary file
systems because it's not read and write.
So I'm going to do a demo.
I'd like to bring up
demo machine number one.
And I'd also like to bring up my
lovely and talented assistant,
Scott Roberts.
You might have seen a demo
similar to this in the keynote.
Avi got his digital camera up and
took a picture of the audience.
I'm going to have Scott do
the same thing here.
Thank you, Scott.
Now,
it turns out I'm not a vice president.
And as a result, I don't make as much
money as Avi Tavanian.
And so I can't afford a really
nice fancy digital camera that has
USB hot plug and so forth and so on.
I have this camera that was given to me
as a gift by a friend of mine actually,
a Kodak DC210+. And-- But the nice thing,
although it doesn't have
USB connectivity and all that,
it does have this little compact flash
card that it uses for memory storage.
And we happen to have--
A sand disk reader here
attached to our demo machine.
And so I'm going to put
this little card in here.
Let's pray a little bit.
and you'll see the image
come up on the system.
Now we're doing something differently
than Avi did because we're not here
to show you image capture or any
of the fancy camera applications.
I just want you to know that
this little compact flash card
is formatted as an MS-DOS disk.
And so we're looking at an MS-DOS volume
that's just loaded on our desktop.
And if I bring up the
preview application,
And I go here to the image that
Scott just took and open it up.
There's a picture of you folks.
I must have said something wrong.
I don't know what.
Okay.
For our other demo, I wanted to show you
the WebDAV file system.
I've got over here on
my other demo machine,
I pre-configured it as a web server.
I actually changed the configuration
file so that it would run the DAV module
that actually ships in Mac OS X as
part of our Apache installation.
So, host 2.162 is running WebDAV and I'm
going to bring up Internet Explorer here,
which I should have pre-launched.
Sorry to waste your folks' time.
And I'm going to type in the URL.
And you can see we have
our little Apache page.
Now what I'm going to do is,
since I'm bored with looking
at things in web browsers,
I'm going to mount this
particular website as if it
were a volume on my desktop.
I do that by hitting Command-K,
going to the Connect to Server dialog,
and typing in the URL here instead.
And now you notice I now have
the Apache website actually
mounted as a volume on my desktop.
Why is that interesting?
Let me show you one thing that we can do.
We took a movie,
actually last year's file system session,
and we edited it and made
a small movie out of it.
And we put it on the web server.
And now instead of going to the
browser and trying to deal with
the QuickTime plugins and so forth,
I'm just going to double click that
movie and we'll show it for you now.
Let me back it up a little bit here.
Thank you.
The stage police are watching me.
And I've heard from my spies that when
I turn around to jump on the stage,
something bad is going to happen to me.
So I have to be careful.
I've noticed that the stage
is higher this year than last,
so I think I'm ready.
I'm getting older.
I can't do this kind of stuff every year.
Okay, let me show you one more thing
that I think is pretty interesting.
I'm going to go into BBEdit here.
Now I haven't actually
completely rehearsed this demo.
I was fooling around
with it before the show,
but I thought it would be kind
of an interesting thing to do.
So I'm going to bring up BBEdit
and I'm going to open up a
file on the WebDAV server.
It's going to be the
English HTML index file.
And I see some text here that says,
let's see, if you can see this,
it means the installation
of the Apache server went,
OK, I don't like that text.
The text I like is file systems rule.
I like that much better.
Now I'm going to go to the
web server here and refresh.
And you can see file systems
rule up here in the top.
So an interesting way to edit your
website is to enable DAV on it and
then you can just use your favorite
editing tools and do whatever you like
inside your favorite editing tool.
When you save,
it's automatically populated
right back up on the server.
You know,
I had to have a plant for that applause.
Okay,
let me talk just briefly about some of
the file system interfaces in Mac OS X.
This is the little file
system interface chart.
You can see the three major
application environments,
Classic, Carbon, and Cocoa on the top.
They all have their own file
manager or file object interfaces,
but they all come through the BSD layer,
and we've extended the BSD layer to
allow access to file system metadata
that's not typically available in Unix,
especially catalog information,
finder and creator,
file type and creator type,
and things that you find on HFS+.
And underneath all of that is our virtual
file system switch I mentioned before,
and that's where additional file systems
that you might develop in Mac OS X or
Stacks would layer into our system.
So I won't go again into detail here,
but suffice it to say the
Carbon File Manager is
still available to you.
It has the Mac OS interface file
system interfaces carried forward.
There's access by
volume reference number,
directory, and ID still available.
And Carbon does an interesting thing.
Carbon provides HFS-style
semantics on file systems that
don't normally support it.
So if you're using UFS,
but your app is using Carbon,
you'll still see resource forks
and you'll still see file IDs.
The file IDs don't last across mounts.
They're done in memory and kept for
you only while the mount exists.
But nonetheless,
they're present if you do a
call and you want to see them.
So you're somewhat insulated if
you're using Carbon from some of
the differences across file systems.
We also, of course,
have the Cocoa environment with
an object-oriented API and some
file objects that you can use.
And as I mentioned,
the Berkeley Unix interfaces
are available and can be
used by your app as well,
even in a mixed environment with
the other application frameworks.
I want to just briefly mention a couple
of the new calls that we added to
the BSD layer for accessing HFS-style
metadata and those sorts of things that
aren't typically available under Unix.
Two major ones,
GetAdderList and SetAdderList,
which roughly stand for
GetAttributeList and SetAttributeList.
These are flexible calls designed to
retrieve various types of metadata,
various different formats,
back to your application.
Normally, you wouldn't call these.
You'd probably call GetCatInfo
or SetCatInfo in Carbon,
but they're available
to you if you need to.
They are in our system.
We also implemented a
call called SearchFS,
which whose job is to do
fast catalog searching.
It's supported in HFS+, although
most file systems don't support it.
But it does allow for
fast catalog searching,
and it was designed to support the
PBCAT search functionality in Carbon.
We also have a call for
exchanging data between files.
Those of you who have done
Carbon apps before are probably
familiar with the exchange.
We created a BSD-level call called
ExchangeData to do that same atomic
transfer of data between two files.
Finally,
we've added some options to FControl,
which is a standard
Unix file system call,
but we have some extensions to
allow behavior like allocating
storage in advance of the LEOF.
So data that's not part
of your file per se,
but is part of the
file-allocated storage,
which can be extended later
without additional allocation.
Now we're at the file system
differences part of the talk.
I'm going to grab a little cup of water
here because this is going to be a little
longer and this stuff is important.
[Transcript missing]
Some of our file systems
support hard links,
which is the ability to create
separate nodes in the file system
pointing to the same data where
the nodes are essentially equal,
not an alias from one
to the actual object.
Some of our file systems have
storage for catalog data,
catalog information.
Some of them don't.
Some of our file systems are multi-fork,
some of them aren't.
I wanted to talk to you about web
dev in particular because web dev
is a really good way of highlighting
some of the odd differences you
might see between file systems.
It's interesting that we have this sort
of file system agnostic architecture
because it allows us to do things like
mount a web server as a file system,
but there are going to be some gotchas.
The web dev protocol does not have any
sort of dates besides modification dates.
So if you wish to get the access
date of a file on the server,
it's actually impossible.
We have to sort of fake that information.
So that's one classic difference.
Inode numbers aren't a concept that is
supported in the web dev protocol either.
Web dev, I should mention,
stands for web-based distributed
authoring and versioning.
The reason it came into existence was to
allow collaborative authoring on the web.
I think it's original envisioning was
for people who are doing development in
a web-based authoring tool to be able
to move things to and from the server
and affect the files on the server,
but it wasn't originally
a file systems protocol.
That's something
Apple decided we could do.
It was a simple protocol that was
created because the protocol added
enough support in the way of a
consistent hierarchical namespace,
some synchronization with locking,
and property management.
But those properties do
not include inode numbers.
And so,
very much like Carbon and file IDs,
when we see a file in web dev,
we generate an inode number,
and we remember that inode number
for the life of your mount.
But if you unmount the web
dev volume and mount it again,
the inode numbers for
files will not be the same.
Also, we can't set live properties
in WebDAV through the protocol.
Live properties are the ones that
are actually supported by the server.
There's also a notion of dead properties
in WebDAV which are you can make up
a property and store value in it.
But real live properties like,
for example, the access time,
those properties are actually on, sorry,
the modification time,
those properties are actually on
the server and we want to respect
those and return those to you,
but the servers will
not let us change them.
So you can't do a set mod time
on WebDAV and have it work.
We'll have that silently fail
to keep apps from killing over.
But be advised that you can see a
silent failure of a set mod time.
The security model for WebDAV is
entirely different from what
you'd expect from a file system.
It's HTTP security.
It's basic authentication
for us generally,
which means that you try a request
and if the server doesn't like you,
it gives you back a message that
says authorization denied and it's
your job to find out the user's
username and password and try again,
sending it across.
But there is no way except for
testing an operation to determine
if the user is going to be able
to do that operation or not.
If you send a put across to the server,
which is the mechanism for
taking a file and moving it up,
you don't know if it's
going to succeed or fail.
There isn't a pre-flight call,
if you will.
You just have to do a put.
So what happens in WebDAV is if
we get an authorization error,
the daemon that supports the file
system puts up a dialog box that says,
"Who are you?
Please type your username and
password in." And then we'll
send that across to the server.
We'll keep doing that until
the user either gets it right,
it times out after about five minutes,
or the user hits cancel.
And if the user hits cancel,
an e-access error comes
back from the file system.
Likewise, unlike AFP or NFS,
which are typically run over
local area networks and are
therefore usually reasonably fast,
maybe not compared to local
items but in the absolute sense,
WebDAV can be quite slow.
It may be running over a 28K modem link,
you never know,
because we're talking about an
internet file system after all.
So we're not going to go through
all of the items on this chart.
I just wanted to scare you a little
bit to give you an idea of how some
of these file systems actually differ.
Classic example,
HFS+ supports privileges.
It has storage in the volume
format for privilege information.
Supports the ability to get an error
back when you delete an open file.
Supports access by ID.
MS-DOS supports none of these things.
WebDAV supports none
of these things either.
NFS is sort of a mix.
Same story with naming differences.
Some file systems are
case sensitive like UFS,
some are case insensitive
like HFS+. Some support
Unicode fully and some don't.
We make a particular mention
of the Unicode characteristic.
HFS+ supports Unicode names
in a canonical form where the
characters are decomposed.
It's possible in Unicode to have, say,
an E with an accent represented as
E with an accent as one character or
E followed by an accent character.
There aren't that many
decomposed characters,
but there are some.
We always store all our file names
decomposed on the volume so that there
will only be one element in a directory
that looks the same to the user.
And so that we'll easily be
able to do name comparisons.
But not all file systems do this.
UFS does not.
UFS does not interpret the bits
and we wind up storing things
on UFS as UTF-8 characters.
And so on UFS,
you actually could have two names
that look identical to the user
but are actually slightly different
in their byte representation.
What this means for your application,
though,
is if you have a composed character and
a name that you send to a create call,
when you look at it again through
a directory listing on HFS+,
it's going to be different.
And on UFS, it'll be precisely the same.
So having said that,
let me give you some tips as to
how you can handle some of the
specific differences we've talked
about today in your application.
Number one, be consistent in your
use of case internally.
We found with the Macintosh
applications environment,
which was a Mac environment that
ran on Unix operating systems,
that lots of Mac apps would keel
over when MAE was running on a
case-sensitive file system and
that characteristic bled through.
Reason being,
they would have files like preferences
that they would open in one part of
their app with a capital P and they
would open in another part of their app
with a small p and they wouldn't be the
same and that would confuse the app.
HFS+, they would be the same, UFS,
they wouldn't be.
You'd either see a different
file or you'd get an E not exist
error when you tried to access
the file but differ it in case.
So make sure that in your app,
when you're referencing
a hard-coded file,
if you do that,
that you're using the same
case in all instances.
Always use decomposed
names in your application.
That way you'll never be surprised by
a name being slightly different on the
way back out than it was on the way into
the file system when you created it.
Be prepared for access
errors at random times.
As I mentioned,
the WebDAV file system has a
very odd permissions model,
and we're going to do things like
put a file across which may happen
in an F-Sync or a flush files
operation or on a close operation,
and we're going to discover at
that time and not in advance that
the operation isn't permitted.
If the user doesn't have a username
and password that allows them to do it,
or if the server administrator
has cut their access,
you can get back any access error
on a close call or on a flush files
call with something which probably
hasn't ever happened to you before.
So be prepared for access
errors at strange times,
and you may want to be able to put
up a dialog that says access denied.
You're going to probably see them
if you're running a Carbon app
as an AFP permissions error
because that's how Carbon maps
our access denied error codes.
Also, do not rely on inode numbers,
and this is also true for file IDs.
If you have a file system
that's unmounted and remounted,
all the inode storage on a WebDAV volume,
all the file ID storage on UFS volume
is kept in memory in big tables,
and there's no effort made to make that
persistent across different mounts.
We have one way to help you deal
with some of these differences and
that is the PathConf system call.
PathConf is designed to give you
characteristic information about
the file system you're running on.
It just takes a path and you give it a
selector that says you'd like to know
if the file system is case sensitive
or if the file systems support,
how long the names are that it supports.
Those are the only two selectors that we
support right now in HFS+ on PathConf.
Perhaps someday we'll expand that list.
But you can use this call,
especially on HFS+ to know that you're
on a case insensitive file system.
So I'm going to now bring up Pat Dirks,
the CoreOS File Systems Technical Lead,
to talk to you about some security issues
and some performance issues in Mac OS X.
Well, the first thing to realize
is that in Mac OS X,
it's a whole new world.
It is multi-user to the core.
There are permissions everywhere and the
core kernel enforces those permissions.
There's no path around it or some
access path that's going to be different
that's not going to be affected by it.
The whole system is
fundamentally multi-user.
The permissions in the system are
the standard Unix permissions.
If you're familiar with those,
the next few slides are just
going to be review for you.
Hold on, there are a few gotchas in the
permission handling of HFS,
but if you are familiar with Unix,
you should be very comfortable with
the permissions model on our system.
And we'll see that
diagram again in a moment.
The permissions, for those of you who may
not be familiar with Unix,
are in some ways similar to Apple Share.
Apple Share's permission when we
were designing the AFP protocol are
based on the Unix permissions model.
And we made a few changes
from there to allow them to
work on a folder-only basis.
So, the permissions are based on
the Unix permissions model.
And we made a few changes
from there to allow them to
work on a folder-only basis.
But they're fundamentally
inspired by the Unix model.
So, instead of see files, see folders,
and make changes, you have read, write,
and execute.
And you have that for files and
you have that for directories.
The catch is it applies to
files as well as folders.
On an Apple Share file server,
the only permissions you ever had
to worry about was the permissions
you had on a given folder.
In Mac OS X,
you have to worry about the permissions
on individual files as well.
And the other difference
with AFP is that in AFP,
you can have separate permissions.
So,
you can have permissions for the world,
the group that owns a particular folder,
and the owner of the folder.
And whichever category you fit in,
you've got those rights.
So, everybody started out with
the everyone permissions.
And then if you were part of the group,
you also got the group's permissions.
And if you were the owner of the object,
you also got the owner's permissions.
In Mac OS X,
there's only one group that is matched.
So, if you're the owner,
you get exactly the owner's permissions.
And if you're in the group,
you get exactly the group's permissions.
And if you're everyone else,
then you get the other permissions.
So, those Unix permissions consist of an
owner ID that is saved with the object,
a group ID that is saved with the object,
a set of permission bits
which you see there,
and a few extra bits that are not divided
up in separate categories for owner,
group, and other.
And we'll cover in a moment what exactly
those bits mean in different cases.
But that's basically it.
Read, write,
execute in three groups and three
special bits and some flags that
we'll cover in a moment as well.
So.
So every user is categorized in
one of three possible groups.
Either the owner of the object,
the group that is
associated with the object,
or everybody else.
And
Whichever group is most specific
determines the access that you get,
as I said.
Again, unlike Apple Share.
So for each group, there is read, write,
and execute.
Write translates very directly
to make changes in AFP.
Read is the right to read a file or
list the contents of a directory.
It's a bit like C file, C folders.
That's where it gets a little weird.
Execute applies most directly to files,
obviously.
If it's an executable and
you have execute permissions,
then you can execute it.
It also applies to directories
as we'll see in a way,
which is kind of a subtle case.
For files, if you set the set UID bit,
then when you execute that binary,
and it only makes sense on executables,
the program will run with the
ID of the owner of that file.
So you'll commonly hear
set UID root binaries.
Those are files that are placed on the
system that will run as a privileged
user in the system when they're executed.
There's also set GID,
which is used less often,
which runs with the group that
is associated with the object.
Now in directories--
It's probably easier to make sense
of these permissions if you think
of directories as files listing
the contents of the directory,
because that's how they
originally came about.
Read is explicitly the permission to
enumerate the contents of the directory,
to type ls and list the contents.
Write is the right to make changes.
It's very analogous
to AFP's make changes.
This is make changes to the directory.
So these are operations that would
require changes in the directory file.
Creating a new file,
renaming a file that's in there,
deleting a file, that sort of thing.
You can set execute on a directory,
and that limits access a little bit.
Without read, normally you have read
and execute together.
If you give execute without read,
you retain the ability
to open files in there,
provided you have permissions
on the file itself.
But you lose the ability to
list the directory contents.
So it's almost sort of
a security-by-obscurity.
If you know what the file name
is or your program has built in
some file that it's referencing,
read is enough to get it open.
But you need read in order to
enumerate the contents and look at it.
So that's sort of an edge
case that you may run into.
It's unusual.
Finally, setting the sticky bit,
one of the special bits that
is associated with an object,
means you can give write,
but the ability to actually
make the changes is limited to
the owner of the object itself.
So it imposes one additional test
before you can actually make use
of the write permission that you
would otherwise look to be granted.
There are a special group of flags
associated with every object as well,
and these exist only in one form.
There's not a separate group of
flags for owner group and others.
There's only one set of flags.
And the most common one you'll see is
the immutable flag that takes the place
of the lock bit that HFS always had.
And that is in fact what setflock and
resetflock in the Carbon interfaces use
to lock or unlock a particular file.
You can see these flags if you
use the dash O option in LS if
you find yourself in the shell.
It will list U change if
the immutable bit is set.
So that's a quick way that you
can tell if things are locked.
And there's a chaflags command
that changes the flags and there's
a chaflags system call that will
manipulate them at the BSD level.
All these things are
accessible at the BSD level.
There's nothing in Carbon or
Cocoa or something that is
special above and beyond this.
Everything is enforced at the
BSD level and everything is
accessible at the BSD level.
The other gotcha you may run into is that
when something has been marked immutable,
it can't be moved.
That used to not be true on Mac OS.
You could lock a file and still
take it and move it somewhere.
on servers, that was actually sort of an
awkward thing to do because you
could lock something down and
somebody who had made changes could
still make it disappear from you.
That's no longer the case.
When something is immutable,
it doesn't go anywhere
and it doesn't change.
Now these flags have the immutable
and the append flags have special
variants of them that can be set only
if you are a specially privileged
user and it can't be unset in
the normal running of the system.
So if you are trying to protect
some particularly important file
in the running of the system,
you can set a special system only
immutable bit that is sort of stronger
even than the regular immutable
bit and that you can't turn it off.
So be careful if you try
this on your machine at home.
You have to take the system
down to single user before
you can clear that bit.
Now, all the Unix aficionados wake up.
This is the part where
things get different again.
There is some special handling
on permissions for HFS+ volumes.
We had a problem in that we wanted
people to be able to take disks and
move them all around from system
to system and retain the same ease
of use that they had in Mac OS 9.
They could take a zip
disk from your system,
take it over to somebody else's system,
and you wouldn't suddenly find that the
permissions were all wacky just because
the numbers that were assigned for the
user ID and group ID on your system
made no sense on the other system.
So,
The system very carefully uses the
permissions only on those disks
that it knows are local or were
specifically requested that they be used.
By default,
if you have an HFS+ disk that the
system has never seen and you connect
it either by plugging in a ZIP disk or
by plugging in a FireWire drive even,
the permissions will fall back
to a scheme where the owner
and the group are ignored.
You can get that same behavior on request
for any disk in the system through
the finder's ignore permissions bit.
We'll talk about that.
So every disk is identified not
by name but by a special 64-bit
identifier that we write on there.
When a disk is being mounted,
the HFS code checks to see if this ID is
one of a disk that it has seen before and
for whom permissions should be enabled.
And if it finds that,
then it will enable the permissions
and it will be used just like
you would see a UFS disk.
You'll see owners, you'll see groups,
you'll see everything.
If there is no entry for that system,
if it's completely unknown,
or if the entry in there says the user
asked that the permissions not be used,
then the handling switches over to ignore
all the user and group IDs on there,
make them unknown, and replace the owner
with the logged in user.
And that's done completely dynamically.
If you have such a disconnected,
you log out, somebody else logs in,
they are now the owner of all
the objects in that system.
So it's not a static mapping.
It's a static mapping.
It's whoever is currently
logged in owns all that.
So it's a very convenient way to
not trip over user or group settings
that make no sense on your system.
So the ignore permissions
checkbox in the finder.
lets you elect to ignore this
and get the same sort of foreign
disk behavior that you get.
And it's the same underlying mechanism.
What the ignore permissions bit
does is basically turn off the
recognition of that disk in the
system and it will treat it without
regard for the users and groups.
It's called Ignore Permissions.
Really the best way to think of it is
to think of it as ignore ownership.
We'll take questions on this later.
I wanted to bring up a few points
about performance in the system,
and in particular,
the different ways that you can do I/O,
a few general words that
we'll touch in a moment.
But we want to cover the differences
between doing buffered file system I/O,
doing direct memory
mapped I/O in the system,
and using unbuffered file system
I/O and the differences between them
and the implications of those things.
I'll say a few words about zero fill,
which your application may have run into,
which is something that you
see on Mac OS X that you
never saw on Mac OS 9 before.
In general,
this shouldn't be news to anybody,
the fewer I/Os you do, the better.
The more you can aggregate your
I/Os into a few large operations,
the faster things will go.
Even if you're doing small transfers,
the system will try to
aggregate these on your behalf.
If you're sequentially
reading through a file,
the system will pick up on that and
it will read larger and larger chunks
even ahead of where you currently are,
and as you're writing,
it will save up writes to do single
large writes out to the disk to
maximize the efficiency of your I/O.
So that is why sequential operations are
so much better than random operations
because even if your application is
only ever asking for 4K at a time,
you'll be doing very large
transfers to the disk.
The zero fill that we'll cover in
a moment is triggered when you are
leaving areas of the file unwritten,
but you do become the owner of them.
And it's best to avoid that because
it's really just wasted effort.
You might as well write
the data sequentially.
Don't skip ahead of the end of file,
for instance.
This is basic buffered file system I/O.
You see the device driver in the system,
which is doing the actual data transfer,
the buffer cache and the
virtual memory system,
which are part of the kernel that
govern all the data in the system.
And in Mac OS X,
those are actually integrated and
they coordinate with each other.
So where there are cases where a
particular piece of a file or a
page in the system is the same,
the buffer cache and the virtual memory
system coordinate access to that page so
there's only ever one copy of the page.
That means if you have something
mapped and you write that,
you'll see those changes in the
mapping right away and vice versa.
If you--if something gets paged out,
the read/write path will
see that right away.
It seems obvious in hindsight,
but it's an awful lot of work
to make that work correctly.
And finally,
there's a user application drawn
there and you see the user application
with a page of memory in there.
That's really--it's really--it's
really--it's really a great
way to get the user to
understand the user application.
So I think that's what we're going to do.
So I think that's really the appearance
of a page that is managed on the user's
behalf in the virtual memory system.
You can think of it either way.
You can think of the page as owned by
the user or you can think of the page
as managed by VM on the user's behalf.
It's really all the same thing.
So in basic buffered I/O,
the data is first copied from the
device driver into a buffer that
is set aside by the file system
to hold blocks for that V node.
So
and those blocks are shared between
VM and the buffer cache as necessary.
So that's the first copy.
Then the file system will copy whatever
the user asked for to be copied either
read or written into the user application
and there's a second copy made into the
user pages that hold the user buffer.
So it's completely flexible.
You can read at any offset in the file.
You can read any amount of data.
But you do end up making two copies.
First, a large page aligned copy for the
convenience of the system into the
buffer cache and then a separate copy
from there into your user address
space where the data really lives.
And by the way, the user page ends up
being dirtied as a result,
and we'll see in a moment
why that's important.
But if you're going to be
reading a file over and over,
or you're reading back
and forth through a file,
it's a cost that's well worth making,
in addition to the flexibility you
gain from the ability to align the
data or the size anywhere you want.
The fact that the copy remains in
the buffer cache means the next time
you hit either in that same page
or somewhere right around there,
you'll probably find it in memory,
and you'll only end up doing
the last copy from the buffer
cache into the user page.
So there's an extra copy,
but it may be worth it
under certain circumstances.
And this is probably what
most of your I/O is like.
This is ordinary, open, close, read,
write I/O.
Instead of that,
you can do memory mapped I/O,
and it's something that you
should consider as an option.
When you're just reading files,
It's a very efficient way to get data in,
and there are some advantages.
Although it requires a
BSD VM call to set it up,
so it may be tricky to do
from a CFM Carbon application,
it's a very nice way to get the
data in because you only end up
doing a single copy essentially.
It goes straight from the device
driver into the VM system,
and from there it's visible
to your user application.
So there's only one copy made,
so you save a copy.
In addition,
The VM page is not marked dirty.
All that's ever happened to that
page is something was read into it,
unlike the user page that
was copied into a moment ago.
So when the system needs more pages,
it doesn't have to go copying that
user page out to swap storage.
It's all set.
It can just throw this away,
and it can read it in later if it
should get page faulted in again.
There are some disadvantages.
Every transfer is at
least a whole page worth,
so if you've got a file
with 10 bytes of data in it,
it's obviously not worth mapping it.
But it's a nice way to get some data
in and read through a lot of data.
The VM system does the same clustering of
IO operations that I mentioned earlier.
As you're touching through pages,
it will start paging in
more and more in advance.
So it's a very good way to read
in a sizable data file that you're
just going to read sequentially.
It's not good for write because
you can't extend a file.
But it's a very good way to read data
in that you're only going to read
and that you're reading sequentially.
And it will save you a copy.
Finally, there's something that's
almost a mixture of the two.
You can choose to do unbuffered I.O.
And it's actually very easy from
Carbon because it's the exact...
I/O pause mode,
no cache bit that you can set on a
read or write transfer in Carbon.
[Transcript missing]
Unlike memory mapping the page,
the page is dirtied,
just like ordinary I/O would be.
The page in the user space is marked
dirty because it's been copied into and
it will be swapped out if necessary.
But it's a good way to do I/O and
not fill up the buffer cache.
If you're not likely to read or write,
to read the data again,
it's a good thing to do.
And you can write files this way.
So if you're writing an output
file that your application
isn't just about to reread,
this may be a good way to do your I/O.
The zero fill I mentioned.
The Mac OS X kernel tries to be very
careful not to let you read data
that you haven't previously written.
If you recall cases where some major
word processing application would
inadvertently ship pieces of your hard
disk out along with your documents,
you'll see why this is
a really nice feature.
You have to be careful though,
because if you have a file
that you're writing randomly,
Uh, you'll end up,
if the first transfer is
some distance into the file,
you'll end up zero filling
the whole intervening space.
Basically anything that
you can potentially read,
you should consider,
you should either write,
or the file system will write
with zeros on your behalf as
part of the write transfer.
So,
Those cases are basically where you
use setEOF to make the file larger
or where you do a write that skips
ahead past the end of file some
distance and starts a transfer there,
creating this gap.
That gap will be zero filled.
So for those reasons,
sequentially writing a file,
aside from all the benefits
I mentioned earlier of clustering
the I.O., is far preferable.
A word about the cost of caching.
You should be careful when you decide
to cache data in your application,
because in Mac OS X you are constantly
running with virtual memory enabled and
what you think of as setting aside some
memory for this particular cache is
really just that much more paged memory.
In fact, you may end up doing a number of
I/O operations just to read the data in.
You may have to page out some
other dirty page in the system
to free up a page for your cache.
You end up incurring the cost
of the actual transfer to read
the page in and if this data
turns out not to be referenced,
you may end up having to page out a
page that you dirtied by this cache.
In addition,
you have to be very careful about
how you structure the cache.
This is not wired memory that's
sitting there for your behalf.
If you have a cache data structure that
is just laid out very conveniently in
memory but ends up skipping around from
this page to that sort of randomly,
you end up touching all these pages
and you may end up doing page ins
with every new page that you touch.
So you have to be very careful that
you structure your cache in a way
that minimizes the number of potential
page hits to get you to your data.
All together,
it's very easy for an application cache
to become much more expensive than simply
reading the data right back in from disk,
especially if the data is something
that is mapped directly into memory,
for instance.
So think about it carefully and only
use caches for things that are truly
hard to reconstruct or where you are
sure that the hit rate is actually very,
very high.
Well finally, Mac OS X is a good time to
rethink some of the fundamental
assumptions behind your application.
Think about the kind of data that
you're reading and the pattern that
you're reading or writing the data in.
And think about what mechanism
you might best use to get that
I/O in and out of the system.
Look at your application as it's
happening and figure out where the
real bottlenecks are before you decide
where to spend your time and effort
and trickiness and what to optimize.
If the bulk of your application
is reading and writing files,
it's obviously worth thinking about.
If the bulk of the time is spent
waiting for the user to click on
some cell somewhere or something,
then it may not be an issue at all.
Look at the underlying assumptions that
went into your application because some
of them may well be changed in Mac OS X.
Some system calls that used to be
almost free on Mac OS X because
they came straight out of memory
all the time may be reasonably
expensive on Mac OS X all of a sudden.
And again,
that's a reason to go back and look
at your application in action and see
where the time is being spent because
you may be surprised to find that you're
spending a lot of time doing things
that you assumed would be almost free.
And finally,
try to avoid making assumptions about
how fast something will be to read
because you might be surprised what's
actually somewhere remote over on a
network in somebody's home directory
and the preference file you thought was
cheap actually turns out to be a very
lengthy operation that might involve
automatically mounting some volume,
getting access to the data, etc.
So don't make assumptions
about what's fast,
what's local, what's remote.
It could be on a WebDAV volume
for all you know.
So finally, there are some tools
that you should look at.
There are some classic Unix tools.
Top is a very nice tool for seeing
the size of your application,
the amount of virtual memory
that it has allocated to it,
how much of that is shared,
how much of that is private,
and it gives you a little
peek into the system and will
show you how fast paging I.O.
is being done, how busy the system is,
what it's doing, what in your system is
using the most CPU time,
all kinds of things.
I recommend it highly.
You should run it often.
There's a time command,
which can be very interesting.
It's limited to command line things,
but it will tell you how much system
time and how much user time was spent
executing this particular application,
along with the number of I.O.s that
were done on behalf of your application.
So you can easily tell when
your application suddenly starts
doing fewer reads or fewer I.O.
transfers or more larger
ones or smaller ones,
or whether the percentage of system
time versus user time is interesting.
If the system is spending most
of its time in system time,
you should think about what system calls
it's doing to cause that to happen.
And similarly,
don't worry too much if most of the
time is spent in the system because
your application's algorithms may not.
B is relevant.
So time can be interesting.
Sample is I gather a
long-standing next step tool.
It's a dynamically probes your
running application and takes a peak
at where the system is currently
running and the stack at that time.
And you can tell it to take a number
of samples over certain period of time
and it will tell you what percentage
of time was spent in what routines
and that may tell you where are the
hotspots in your application are.
Tell you whether your application is
constantly waiting for I/O to come
off disk or waiting for the user to
do something or all sorts of things.
So sample is interesting.
And finally,
FS usage which you may have seen
demoed in other sessions as well is a
wonderful tool for getting down to the
real nitty-gritty of exactly what your
application is doing and what the system
is doing on behalf of your application.
You may be making Carbon calls
and be unaware of the fact that
you're running your application.
So you can use this tool to get a
better understanding of what your
application is doing and what the system
is doing on behalf of your application.
You may be making Carbon calls
and be unaware of the fact that
you're running your application.
So you can use this tool to get a
better understanding of what your
application is doing and what the system
is doing on behalf of your application.
You may be making Carbon calls
and be unaware of the fact that
you're running your application.
You may be making Carbon calls
and be unaware of the fact that
you're running your application.
You may be making Carbon calls and
be unaware of the number of system
calls that go on under the covers
to make that Carbon API happen.
So.
I'd like to bring up our
resident expert in bad demo code,
my manager, Clark Warner.
[Transcript missing]
I'm going to bring up a copy of TextEdit,
which many of you, I imagine,
have probably used by now.
And let me bring up a copy
of the Process Viewer.
I'll have to do this the hard way.
All right.
Okay.
First I'm going to do my little Unix
command here to find out the PID number
of the process that is TextEdit.
It looks like 278.
Let me change the font here to make
this a little bit more readable for you.
[Transcript missing]
What's that?
Oh, thank you.
Okay.
Now I'm now monitoring all the behavior
of TextEdit and when I go back into,
whoops.
Let me bring it back.
You can see as I click around
various things are happening.
One of the things I'll do is open up
a file that I put on our demo volume.
You can see a lot of
things are happening now.
Here's 116 demos.
Data file.
Okay.
So here's my opening of the data file.
You'll notice there were a few page ins,
some opens, some fstats, some reads,
but basically one read call
of a fairly large size.
So that's not too bad.
I'm going to close up this file here.
Let me just show you.
[Transcript missing]
I think I would have woken up by now.
The man page for FFS usage.
One of the most interesting things about
the FS Usage program is the ability
to see all of the actual Carbon file
system calls that are happening
while the read calls are happening.
If you notice here,
there's this temp file tracing.
If you create in /temp this
file called file tracing,
then you will actually see all the
Carbon calls as well as all of the
BSD calls that are coming through.
And to show you that briefly,
I'll turn that on.
And now I'm going to launch an
application that I call dumb text.
ThumbText is the standard
simple text text editor hacked
up to do one-byte file reads.
Just to give you an idea of if
you guys wrote apps this way,
this is how you can figure
it out before your boss does.
Let me talk to you a little bit
about some of the key issues in
building your own file system.
One is, it's really not recommended.
And the reason we say that--
[Transcript missing]
Funnels are acquired when a
thread enters a system call.
They're released when the
thread returns to user mode.
They're also released when a system call
reaches a voluntary yield point like I/O,
allocating memory, and so forth.
But they're held across
kernel preemption.
So a BSD system call now can be preempted
in the kernel and something else can run,
a user thread or a Mach thread or
an I/O Kit thread and so forth,
but the BSD structures won't
change out from underneath
the BSD kernel system call.
So it's happy.
We also split the funnel after we
developed the first one so that
now networking operations in the
kernel are handled in the network
funnel and all other operations
including file system operations
are handled in the kernel funnel.
We found that we actually could separate
network activity in the kernel from
file system activity in the kernel.
What this means though is if you
were writing a network file system,
say, every time you went to use the
networking infrastructure in the kernel,
you'd have to change your funnel,
switch from the kernel
funnel to the network funnel.
When you went back,
you'd have to switch back.
Switching funnels is a blocking call.
The entire world can change
from under you when you switch
from the network funnel to the
kernel funnel and vice versa.
All things you would have to know.
Network funnel is for things like socket,
I/O,
and find and accept calls and so forth.
Kernel funnel for everything else.
There are some calls, of course,
that can be called either from
either funnel or from no funnel.
Memory allocation and free, etc.
So,
here are some need to knows if you wanted
to build a kernel extension for Mac OS X.
One, as we mentioned last year,
we built this thing we call
the unified buffer cache,
which if you had built the file
system prior to that would have
had to change to support it.
Likewise, between public beta and now,
we introduced the split funnel.
And of course,
we're going to be doing things
to improve the performance of our
kernel and the functionality of
our kernel on into the future.
And some of those things are going to
require changes in the file system.
And if you have one written,
you're going to have to
be inside of the loop.
You're going to have to contact Apple.
There's other stuff that may be involved,
but we can only tell
you so much in an hour.
So the primary message is talk to Jason.
If you're thinking about
building a file system,
contact Apple.
You're going to have to be in the loop.
Now, we do a little demonstration here
because we like to bring concepts
home at the file system session.
And so, I am a rogue kernel
file system extension.
And my compatriots here, Pat Dirks,
Scott Roberts,
and Umesh Vaishampayan are the kernel.
And this is me,
an inappropriately versioned
kernel file system extension.
So, I'm going to be using the
kernel file system extension,
attempting to load.
. .
I think you get the picture.
Here's some other sessions you may
be interested in at the show to
help you with building applications
that are file system centric or even
building file system extensions.
Open source at Apple is
happening at 10:30 right
after this session in Hall A2.
There's a session on AFP Server and
the Apple Share Client file system
in Mac OS X that's happening
tomorrow in this room at 3:30.
There's a Carbon performance
tuning session happening in
Hall 2 tomorrow at 2:00 and an
Apple Performance Tools session
happening in Room A2 Thursday at
5:00 where you may get to look
at your third demo of FS Usage.
We think FS Usage is so important
that if you come to the Worldwide
Developers Conference you
should see it at least twice,
possibly three times.
Likewise,
leveraging BSD services will happen in
the Civic Auditorium Friday at 2 o'clock.
The Darwin Kernel presentation,
which will give you an idea of how
the kernel is structured internally,
the Mach kernel and some of the
BSD kernel services outside of
file systems and networking,
that's going to be at
the Civic Center at 3:30.
And the Darwin Feedback
Forum will be Friday at 5:00.
That's all we have for you today.
I'm going to ask Jason Yao to come up,
and he's going to moderate
our question and answer.
I'm going to bring Pat Dirks,
Scott Roberts, Umesh Vaishampayan,
and Don Brady up on stage from
the file systems and kernel team,
and we'll take your questions.